Every raster in the Bathymetry Catalog is displayed in Web Mercator.
This projection is the standard for use on the web.
However, all data collected by DWR NCRO staff is originally gathered in either NAD83 State Plane Zone II or Zone III with units of US_Feet.
The one external dataset displayed was collected in NAD83 HARN State Plane Zone III with units of US_Feet.

The names of the text files as downloaded from the Bathymetry Catalog (once unzipped) contain either Zn2ft or Zn3ft, referring to the spatial references above.





Points of Contact:
Scott Flory
Research Analyst II
916-376-9603

Shawn Mayr
Senior Engineer
916-376-9664

Wyatt Pearsall
Environmental Scientist
916-376-9643





Equipment and Methodology:
NCRO's bathymetry and positioning systems are composed of the following items:

Multibeam Sonar Bathymetry System:
• R2Sonic 2022 Multibeam Echo Sounder
• Trimble R-8 GNSS GPS Real Time Kinematic (RTK) positioning system
• Hemisphere Crescent VS100 GPS Heading Device
• SMC IMU-108 Motion Reference Unit (MRU)
• Odom Hydrographic Digibar Pro Sound Velocimeter
• North River Seahawk OB24 Vessel

Single Beam Sonar Bathymetry System:
• Odom Hydrotrac II HT97001 singlebeam sounder – 340kHz
• Trimble R-8 GNSS GPS real time kinematic (RTK) positioning system
• G3 1966CC Vessel

SonarMite Single Beam Bathymetry System:
• Trimble R-8 GNSS GPS Real Time Kinematic (RTK) positioning system
• Ohmex Instrumentation Sonarmite v3 singlebeam sounder
• Trimble TSC2 Controller
• Tarpon120 Kayak

RTK Positioning System:
• Trimble R-8 GNSS GPS Real Time Kinematic (RTK) positioning system
• Trimble Trimark 3 Radio Modem

The majority of the bathymetric data in the catalog was collected with the Multibeam system.
The Single Beam and SonarMite systems were utilized only in shallow water areas that the Multibeam system could not access or safely navigate. The use of all three Bathymetry systems allows NCRO to maximize the strengths of each system to develop detailed and complete bathymetry datasets no matter the circumstances.

The following datasets contain singlebeam addendums:
	Miner_2012_01_26 (separate files)
	Columbia_2012_05_30 (incorporated)





Field Practices:
Field calibration tests (including multibeam patch tests, sound velocity readings, and RTK
GPS observations) are regularly performed in order to ensure data quality and positional
accuracy. Multibeam data are recorded using Hypack Hydrographic Survey software (Hypack). Data
are processed using Hypack, exported as XYZ text files, and imported as point feature
classes in a geodatabase using ArcGIS 10. Data are tied into the NAVD 88 and NAD83
datums by setting temporary controls throughout the study areas.

Measure Description:
RTK GPS was used to determine the position (XYZ) of the onboard GPS and
sonar instrumentation. Positional accuracy of the RTK GPS base station was verified daily by
observing up to 5 known locations surrounding the study area.

Evaluation Method:
Prior to every survey, DWR NCRO staff set up a base station RTK GPS on a
DWR monument called Miner Reset. To verify that the base station GPS was set up and
broadcasting correctly, NCRO staff measured the position of up to 5 previously established
temporary benchmarks surrounding the study area using the positional information the base
station was broadcasting. The observed values were compared with the established values and,
if inconsistency was discovered, adjustments were made.





Post Processing:

Multibeam Processing Overview
Multibeam processing is initially performed using Hysweep Editor in Hypack Hydrographic
Survey software (Hypack). Hysweep Editor is used to check the “read parameters”:
instrumentation coordination and settings, offsets, RTK options, sound velocity, etc. A
section of data is then cleaned in Hysweep Editor to remove erroneous data that is mostly
at the edges of the beam swath. Each section is composed of multiple lines.
After a day’s worth of sections are cleaned they are combined in a “log file” and the “read
parameters” are checked again for consistency. The log is then exported as a 3 x 3 ft
gridded text file. The text file is imported into Microsoft Access (Access) and the data is
reviewed again for proper positional extents. The Access table is imported into ESRI
ArcMap and a 3x3 raster is created for each log and reviewed for positional consistency
and accuracy. If any inconsistencies exist, the raw data is extensively examined in Hypack
and the inconsistency is resolved. The data is then re-exported as a text file and imported
back into ArcMap and reviewed.
After the dataset passes the review process, the logs are mosiacked together in ArcMap as
a raster. Overlapping data from different logs are averaged and applied to the master
grid. The master grid is converted back to a point feature class. A final XYZ text file and
point feature class is exported and metadata is applied.
Glossary for Processing Units of Scale (from smallest to largest):
Swath: The spread of acoustic beams that falls onto the bed of the water body like a large
rake. The swath is perpendicular to the travel of the vessel.
Line: A fairly linear single boat path that is typically 100 to 600 ft long. Each line has its
own file in the raw data. Each line is stack of a varying width swath of points that varies
between 10 to 300 feet wide depending on the depth.
Section: A sub-section of the river log file that is sized for processing efficiency. Usually
from 200 to 600 ft long and is composed of multiple lines.
Log: A group of sections that were collected in one day. There are usually 3 to 10
sections per day depending on the body of water.
Master Grid: A unified data set for the entire project.

Singlebeam Processing Overview
Single Beam processing is performed using the Single Beam Editor in the Hypack
Hydrographic Survey software (Hypack). First, the survey parameters are entered in
the "Read Parameters" dialog box and applied to the data collected during the survey.
Read parameters include information about: sound velocity, instrumentation coordination
and settings, instrumentation offsets, data sorting, and RTK tide values. Once the
parameters are applied to the raw data, each survey line is examined individually for
erroneous data or abnormalities. Survey lines are saved into an "Edited" folder in Hypack
after erroneous data is deleted.
Then, all of the edited survey lines are opened together in Single Beam Editor and the
correct "Read Parameters" are confirmed. All the single beam survey data is thinned to 1
point per 3 linear feet and exported as an XYZ text file. The text file is imported into
Microsoft Access (Access) and the data is reviewed again for proper positional extents.
The Access table is imported into ESRI ArcMap as a point feature class and reviewed for
positional consistency and accuracy. If any inconsistencies exist, the raw data is
extensively examined in Hypack Single Beam Editor and the inconsistency is resolved. The
data is then re-exported as a text file and imported back into ArcMap and reviewed.
The final data consistency review process involves a comparison of the Multibeam
bathymetry and Single Beam bathymetry. If there is any inconsistency between the
datasets, each is re-evaluated in Hypack.
Once the Single Beam dataset passes the review process, a final XYZ text file and point
feature class is exported and metadata is applied.

During surveys, areas near the water's edge and areas of shallow water depth are
occasionally occupied by aquatic vegetation. Dense aquatic vegetation interferes with the
sounder's ability to record reliable bathymetric information. Therefore, in order to properly
represent the bathymetry of the entire channel, elevation data in areas of the channel
occupied by dense aquatic vegetation are omitted from the final data set and appear as
gaps in the data.






